is this the future of architecture is  this the way architecture is going to be  studied is this the way people are going  to matriculate to and earn their  credentials  to be architects wouldn't it be possible  for there to be globally  a sudden wave  of super popular  architect youtube channels  where they say you yes you if you put in  the time just 15 minutes a day just one  hour a day whatever it is if you put in  the time if you buy the books if you buy  my book if you sign up for my course if  you watch my youtube videos you  yes you  can be an architect maybe you can even  be an especially gifted architect one of  the greatest one of the most influential  architects  of your generation  or in the history of the world the funny  thing is  that's much more plausible  than doing what we're now doing with  language education on youtube i think  everyone in this audience if you really  just stop and think about it and if you  can't visualize this  you can do a quick google search  look at a pdf of what's inside a  university-level  architecture textbook you know okay  if you're gonna put a swimming pool on  the roof then you have to think about  the weight of the swimming pool and how  that's distributed throughout the  building  you can say it's not rocket science but  the truth is even rocket science isn't  rocket science we could have a sudden  wave of teacher self rocketry  videos on youtube where you get familiar  with the physics and the engineering  involved in building miniature rockets  in your own backyard  in theory you could create standardized  exams so that people can actually go  into the rocket science industry with  what they've learned on youtube what  they've learned by signing up and buying  the ebook buying the course  so on and so forth as as wildly  implausible as it sounds in our culture  to be a self-taught architect  or a self-taught rocket scientist that's  much more plausible  than being self-taught in any one  foreign language let alone five foreign  languages eight foreign languages so on  and so forth  i think what's happened  on a huge scale globally not just in  english-speaking cultures not just on  youtube  is that the whole world is excited  to see something that was formerly  expensive  and hard to get  become  free  or incredibly cheap  and  instantly available  easily accessible okay  language education  for centuries  was very very expensive  and even if you had the money  it was  inaccessible not everyone growing up in  ireland  had the option of studying latin  like even  not going back to ancient times here we  could we'd go all the way back to the  dark ages you know you could you could  ask yourself let's say you were a lad  growing up in ireland in the 10th  century and you want to learn latin 11  12 13 14 15 we could work through  century by century what were your  options and this is going to sound crazy  guys but if you think every monastery  taught latin you're wrong if you think  every monk in every monastery had the  opportunity to learn latin you're wrong  it's one of the reasons people would  pardon me it is one of the reasons  people would sign up and go and live in  a monastery was the hope of advancing  their own education and learning  especially  latin and by the way ireland is one  example romania is another you know  eastern europe history of christian  christianity archangels but even in the  19th century in the 20th century  the possibility of learning latin the  possibility of learning greek these  things you competed for them  opportunities were scarce and they were  expensive and it was a huge sacrifice in  your own life to do it now  the history frankly of learning any  other language is much shorter  where you live right now i have viewers  all over the world  so wherever you live right now for how  many centuries has it been possible to  study chinese  you might be shocked at how recently it  became possible to learn the chinese  language where you're living wherever it  is i had a conflict with a professor  here and  this is a long story that i'm going to  make short and it went on all night i  mean we went out to dinner and we know  that we became friends but it began by  him being furious at me  because he stood up and he said to the  class that the history of asian studies  in western academia began with the  american army being in japan and world  war ii and then uh the next step was the  creation of a asian languages unit at  the university of chicago there was a  department first in the 1950s this  this is the  and um i said  it's tell me tell me something  are you claiming that before world war  ii  nobody in europe had studied sanskrit  are you claiming that there is no  tradition of classical chinese studies  of translations of chinese and you know  i was just an undergraduate student in  the class  he was furious he was he was so angry at  me and he was really denouncing and  attacking me and then he gradually  figured out like over like 15 minutes  into the that i was really the most  brilliant student he'd had in the last  10 years or was whatever his career  hasn't been i was the most brilliant he  was gonna have he flipped and he started  really that that night we talked for  several hours that night but he didn't  take until the next day he realized wow  i'm mad at this student and actually i  should be really appreciative of what  the students pray in the classroom you  know but the point is um  this myth he was  presenting if you actually look into it  like if you live in chicago at what  point did it become possible  for anyone to learn chinese in chicago  latin has a longer history right at what  point did it become possible to learn  japanese in chicago you what this  professor was saying even though i  ridiculed it even though i criticized  him and he felt ridiculous  which is the point of a good ridicule  you know um  wherever you live if you live in milan  if you live in uh  madrid if you live in you know athens  greece  when did it become possible to study any  of these languages you might be shocked  at how short the history is now i'm  pointing this out for several different  reasons  it's unbelievable how conservative our  universities are if you go to any  university and ask well how do you teach  chinese the answer you're going to get  is this is the way it has always been  done and this is the way it always shall  be  really really so um  pimsleur audio cassettes how long has  that technology  sitting down with an exit multiple  choice tests using a photocopier and  playing an audio cassette or an audio cd  re this is your ancient continuous  tradition so language learning methods  that require you to have an application  on your cell phone to look up chinese  words using  handwriting recognition  yeah uh-huh how many years aren't there  some professors here right now who are  old enough to remember the methods used  for  the attitude is this is the way it is  always being social so must it be uh  forever more there's this unbelievable  conservatism that's hard to chill at  universities  language education was  four centuries  incredibly expensive incredibly hard to  qualify for hard to access hard to come  by and it was one of  the  distinctive marks of being a member of a  social and political elite not just in  europe not just in america how would you  look at the history of turkey the  ottoman empire and what being polyglot  meant there and seriously those guys  knew six totally different languages to  be a polyglot in the turkish empire and  the ottoman empire but that was not easy  the number of languages you had to  master  and then what came with that was a  certain station and status in society  how about how about the british empire  in india how about the french empire of  vietnam language education has always  been linked to  grandiose imperialist projects  including the status of latin within  europe the status of ancient greek  within europe but guys i've done a lot  of research in just the last couple of  years  but the history of the american  revolution  including kind of notorious figures like  benjamin franklin and  thomas jefferson you know names that  have become famous and names that have  been forgotten  people who've disappeared from history  what made a gentleman  in that period  of american history  officially there was no aristocracy  right what they believed in was natural  aristocracy  it's a really powerful concept in this  united states of america and thus to  some extent in the history of the whole  world oh natural aristocracy if you were  in the army  were you a soldier or were you a  gentleman  okay knowledge of latin was  crucial  to your claim  to being a gentleman in that period the  period let's say 50 years before the  american revolution and 50 years after  right  [Laughter]  how much latin did these guys really  know i'm incredibly cynical about that  frankly i think if you just read the  books they've left behind carefully or  read the letters that let find carefully  i think they understood less latin than  i understand french  nevertheless right this is a this is a  colony  on the outermost cusp of the empire a  colony actively engaged in slave trading  actively engaged in genocide against the  indigenous people and just a colony  where life was dirty  you know you got your hands dirty  something really stays with me from the  autobiography of benjamin franklin just  the description of going from one city  to another within  the thirteen colonies as these them were  later the united states america just  getting from philadelphia to uh  new york or from boston to philadelphia  it was an adventure  you risked your life and you got your  hands dirty and there were no flushing  toilets and things you know like life  was dirty how do you how do you lift  yourself  above you know the blood and the filth  of what life was  in the american colonies language  education was crucial  all right  obviously to some extent i'm ridiculing  this but to some extent  how did governor morris become the most  powerful man in the united states of  america and he was in any given time if  you make a list of who who are the most  powerful people in american politics  governor morris is going to be in the  top five and he might be number one he  was one of the most powerful political  figures in the united states america  certainly in new york city  certainly in new york state you know  this guy was tremendously powerful he  became one of the most important people  in the history of the french revolution  too long story i can't get into  yeah his claim  to speaking french  was crucial for other people their claim  to speaking spanish was crucial and for  other people still you see this even in  what's written about them quite apart  from what they wrote themselves their  claim to knowing latin their claim to  know in greek these were really serious  symbols of status privilege and  authority and they were purchased at  great price  i'm gonna digress to tell a story that's  not a digression at all  i think so melissa's here off camera  melissa let me know if you've heard this  story before on youtube i think i have  never told the story before on youtube  but i might have told it to you in real  life all right so i knew an old woman  with gray hair  who was a devotee of the buddhist  religion so she was a white western  woman  who had lived an extraordinary life  let's let's be real here  you know  to say someone is of above average  intelligence  what's your definition of average and  above average i mean it's kind of but  this was this was not a stupid woman at  all and she had lived in several  different continents in the world and  had seen many things and done many  things in her in her time she was an  experienced interesting person  not a genius  studied several languages  not a genius just just saying she i  think she was a person of above average  intelligence  but  as even this anything will show in some  ways she was she was struggling with the  finitude of her own intellect and energy  you know she had grown gray in years by  the time i had this conversation with  her quite quite likely she's dead now  and i think about it i haven't haven't  googled her before telling this anton  and she said to me  angrily  she said  when i was with the peace corps doing  humanitarian work  they gave us a short course for the  tagalog language language of the  philippines  and  that course made it easy  they gave us a course  tagalog for dummies  and that simplified everything and done  it  got rid of all the grammar and got rid  of all the complexity and you know made  it so a child could learn it and then we  just practiced that again and then we  went out and did this humanitarian work  and we all spoke tackle  yeah you could all say where's the  bathroom  what do you mean by you spoke that could  you read the newspaper and tackle you  know  leaving that aside and she said to me  angrily she said  why can't you make a book like that for  pally why can't you scholars use  scholars of ancient buddhism why can't  you give me a short course in pali why  can't you give me pali for dummies why  can't you take this language and this  literature in this philosophy and make  it easy so that everyone can learn so  someone like me  can learn  and i said this and she was really angry  now  i could digress here to talk about the  psychology of why she was so angry i do  think in part she was someone who had  accomplished remarkable things with her  life  just remarkable explorations as zarya  indicated at a young age she was with  the peace corps and went to the  philippines and a few other places in  southeast asia she'd done humanitarian  work i think she'd claimed her share of  mountains  both literally and figuratively but when  it came to language learning she didn't  understand she couldn't accept why does  it have to be  so hard  she had the world's greatest motivation  to learn the pali language specifically  which is that she thought that pali was  the sacred language of the scriptures of  the buddha and she has a religious  fervor for this you know so you can't  ask someone to be more highly motivated  to one language but she had found i  don't know how many times she tried in  trying to learn the language she found  again again it was just impossible for  her  anyway so she was really angry and i  think that anger reflects years of  struggle and disappointment and you know  her own  awareness that she's a talented  hard-working person she has some  intelligence to bring to this  and some humiliation and frustration  that despite her intelligence and  despite the depth of her religious  conviction and and fanaticism frankly  wasn't enough  this was still just too hard for her to  do and i remain completely calm and my  sense of humor has changed a bit over  the years but with the laconic sense of  humor i had at that time  i said to her easy  are you you want you want it to be easy  you know i was speaking softly  intentionally together to you know kind  of  why why would it be easy  i said tell me something  you ever read aristotle  can you make aristotle easy  [Laughter]  you want to read aristotle in ancient  greek  is it going to be easy  if i could  take aristotle  and make it easy  would you want to read that version of  aristotle  if it's gonna be  i can do that for you  take aristotle i can break it down i can  make it easy i can give you aristotle  for  but it's not gonna be  aristotle anymore  is it  shakespeare why can't shakespeare be  easy it wouldn't be  shakespeare anymore  if it's easy right  you know you want to be able to read  philosophy in this language you want to  be able to talk about and debate like  epistemology and ethics and metaphysics  in pali that's the level like you don't  want to ask where's the bathroom you  know what like sure any language if  that's all you want it's phrasebook  where's the bathroom i'm thirsty i'm  hungry okay you know basically any  language in the world that's gonna be  pretty easy okay you know  um  why why would that be easy it can't be  easy  and if it were easy  it wouldn't be worth doing it wouldn't  be worth doing at all and again it's too  good for credit she uh she calmed down  you know  and um she saw the truth in what i was  saying and i don't think that was easy  for her to accept she was an old woman  and i think  she was facing up to the possibility  that she was going to die  and go to her grave without ever reading  the sacred word of the buddha siddhartha  gautama you heard of him  now  you know  the truth is she could have learned pali  at that level within five years  it's just if english is your first  language poly is not that hard sanskrit  is not that it's not you know five years  of hard work sure totally and she had  more than five years to live  she totally could have done it  but it's not easy  and i'm not gonna make it easy for you  nobody is going to make it easy for you  right  now religion brings in other dimensions  to this  but i think what i said in the first 10  minutes this video you can still see  would apply to the sanskrit pali so on  and so forth  something incredibly expensive  incredibly difficult to access  right  then the internet  suddenly  seemingly  makes it available for free  makes it accessible to everyone right so  i mean books  that genuinely like you just couldn't  get before you could not get a copy of  these books at any price  books that were incredibly expensive  forms of education that only a few of  the most famous universities in the  world could offer like harvard school  world religions  and uh sorry  harvard school of world religions used  to be famous harvard's school divinities  um  cambridge and oxford you know just a few  where can you learn sanskrit where can  you learn pali right  there was the tantalizing sense  that language education  was now cracked open and made available  to all  at the click of a mouse button  or maybe for three easy payments of 5.99  instead of thousands of dollars hundreds  of thousands of dollars years of your  life lost to an authoritarian  institution right big fundamental  turning point in history or was it  you know  what happened to  cinema  didn't happen to language education what  happened to  recorded music you know vinyl albums  look at the cost of a vinyl album look  at downloading  an mp3 a music file from the internet  legally or illegally there's a cost to  both the internet's not completely free  right but you can have every song the  beatles  ever recorded right  with a few mouse clicks again even  legally even buying these things and  paying the fee for it's not that much  money right  um  it seemed to people  that this was happening with  language education now why the  excitement  why is this scam even possible like you  can't scam people if they don't want  something from you and they don't think  it's attainable right  like i can't really scam you  through education in architecture there  is no architecture scene on youtube and  there could be it's easy to it's so much  easier to learn to be an architect are  you kidding me  right there's no scene on youtube for  teaching yourself law teach yourself how  to be a barrister how to be a lawyer  it's so much easier dude what the [ __ ]  do you think is harder than learning  chinese  what the [ __ ] is harder that what needs  more help than that you know  um  it became possible for this scam  subculture to evolve right  because  it was thinkable  because the fantasy was  believable let's get into briefly what  the what the fantasy is  i anyone in the audience can comment i  do see your comments coming in but  melissa you also count as a member of  the audience you know  you asked me if i  remember you telling that story  yeah first time that's been on on the  tube  yeah  um  you know  if you become an architect  what do you think that's going to do for  your sex life  i like real talk real talk you know well  it could be it could be art history you  know melissa remembers we took this walk  around an art gallery and she was  shocked  melissa was making some bumpkin comments  about how she had no understanding of  these paintings and i was i was shy and  i was able to like give a lecture on  each no no i know who painted this i  know what its historical significance is  i know what school of art this comes  from i can i can talk for you you know  15 minutes or something these paintings  like no i have a background an artist  just like well to the right people  that's sexy you know being able to give  a tour of an art gallery you know i  think there are a whole lot of women  who are looking for a man who's an  architect or something like  an architect right i think there were a  whole lot of women like let's let's say  you work in construction let's say your  actual job is mixing and pouring cement  okay but what if you had the same  education as an architect like your  actual job is still pouring cement but  you did a self-taught architecture  degree  i mean the number one fantasy fueling  the polyglot phenomenon on youtube and  across the internet is the fantasy that  you will get laid it is the fantasy that  you will be  appreciated and desired  by members of the opposite sex or if  you're gay  members of the same sex oh  pardon me across the world somewhere  whether that's in japan  china thailand  uh what have you and i have seen videos  pointing out that even within the muslim  world  or obviously women have a lot less  sexual liberty even within the muslim  world and the study of languages  that exist only in muslim majority  countries you can still see this  sex tourism element you know forcing it  forward see that's that's clearly one  part of the fantasy  reciprocal with that though  maybe we have to recognize  language  no longer has the power  that it had for  ben franklin  right like again i don't think ben  franklin could read a sentence in latin  or greek i don't i think his language  it's completely phony it's this myth  people made up about him and he probably  encouraged the myth to a significant  extent also because he wanted to present  himself as a man of letters and an  esteemed statesman and all these things  and he had no formal education  whatsoever  his whole life story is very well  documented and if you read his  autobiography you get to read about just  how little  education he had  he worked with his hands he was an auto  died act we cannot say also you know but  he wanted to be perceived as a great  scientist a great statesman  so on and so forth and he was you know  to whatever extent he was creating a  myth  the myth was very convincing for people  and a crucial element of the myth was  that he could read latin and greek does  anyone give a [ __ ]  in 2022 if you can read latin and greek  all right oh guys  i don't exactly suffer  from low self-esteem  when i was in university when i was a  teenage male all kinds of women wanted  to [ __ ] me that was really my experience  my experience really was pretty much  being the top of the food chain and we  could could get into the reasons as to  why that is and maybe that reflects  something really pathetic about these  women like i'm not saying it's because  i'm so great maybe it reflects something  really pathetic about the other men who  were my de facto competition whether or  not i wanted to compete with them right  like there were a lot of women who were  tired  of dating a schlemiel who sits on the  couch couch and watches sports on tv  people men whose lives revolve totally  around  uh sports and action movies and video  games in which you shoot people in the  head again again like whatever it is  like to some extent it's the other man  to some extent i'm not saying this  reflects anything anything great about  me i but guys i don't think i grew up in  a culture where my  social status even in this sense  would be improved by knowing latin or be  improved by nome greek where it would be  improved by knowing french not at all in  canada it's allegedly bilingual country  nobody gives a [ __ ] if you speak good  for nobody it's it's pitiful the state  of bilingualism is good nobody cares  won't improve your sex life in any way  and you know i'm using sex life really  as a relatively easy tangible standard  for a more complex analysis of your  standing in life politically you know  like  you guys know i politically i was  involved i used to go to city hall i was  involved in the green party i went to  different kinds of political events do  you think my social standing was in any  way tied to my ability to speak latin  greek french  my knowledge of frankly any literature  like whether you think that ancient  greek literature like in that sense that  we're you know being well-ready  no  and look you can do a whole discourse  about this  what's happened on the left you know the  rise and fall of marxism marxists didn't  value knowledge of latin or knowledge of  greek and even in the post-marxist era  you know the effects of marxism are  indelible on our political climate  that's really what killed the respect  for the greco-latin tradition it died  with marxism nobody in the post-marxist  era  you know  defines their own importance and worth  in terms of being well-read in ancient  latin and greek sources and nor anything  else there wasn't some other canon of  literature that replaced it i'll see  nobody gave a [ __ ] whether or not i  could speak french nobody thought it was  like a requirement to be a kind of  upwardly mobile erudite person to be  have a high level of ability in in  french i think this is still true  throughout canada you know and and  beyond that okay so now now what do you  want you want to talk about chinese you  want to talk about sanskrit look what  we're going to talk about  what other languages matter  you know  and you know yes it's easy to say oh you  know americans and canadians were just  such a such a culture of uh i don't know  lunch bucket rednecks or whatever oh  we're such an unrefined culture of  knuckle draggers or something it's easy  to beat up on ourselves i think this is  really a global phenomenon you know i  don't think this is peculiar uh to the  united states of america and certainly  what do you think it's better in  australia  what do you think you know what what  does language have to do with with  social status well i'm pointing out the  world that existed uh around the time of  the american revolution benjamin  franklin blah blah blah that has died  that social significance given language  however  what the youtube polyglot phenomenon  illustrates  is the emergence of a new fantasy  right  now i mean sorry because the old one  it's also a kind of fantasy like i  literally i think  millions of young men around the world  for a period of at least 150 years  they read about benjamin franklin and  they studied hard at school because they  wanted to be something like benjamin  franklin one day millions of young men  he was an icon for several generations  and millions of young men studied  science and studied latin and studied  greek because there was a sense in which  they wanted to be like benjamin franklin  not exactly the same like this is what  it is to be a distinguished gentleman  who's taken seriously despite being born  poor and being a workman earning your  living in a manual trade you know with  your with your hands  you know so anyway i just say i do think  he had that that kind of there was a  kind of fantasy now for what percentage  of people did the the fantasy uh work  out well i'd point out that fantasy  is based on working your way up  within the culture you're born into  that's interesting in several different  ways  i think the prevalent fantasy now that  the whole polyglot youtube scam  preys upon  it both feeds and feeds upon is instead  fundamentally an escapist fantasy right  the escapist fantasy is that you can run  away to japan and be somebody special  and be something special right you can  teach yourself japanese and you can run  away to japan and start a new life  now is you  in this equation  what if we're talking about a young man  born and raised in morocco  muslim family  muslim-majority culture  it doesn't really matter if i say  morocco or i say indonesia frankly but  let's stick with morocco what if you're  a young man  born in  morocco and  growing up  you watch these cartoons  that show you a society in japan  just implicitly it shows you how  profoundly different japanese society is  mural  and i know all those cartoons the  cartoons that are for children made in  japan  there is a heavily censored version of  them for the muslim world and to my  knowledge the biggest single market is  malaysia like they think okay we're  gonna do this version we're gonna censor  it we're gonna have a malaysian version  for malaysia but i believe they're  distributed throughout all around the  world people end up seeing them in  saudi arabia and  all over the place you know regardless  of what the actual marketing intent is  what the economic rationale is for  making these especially sensitive  versions but you'll notice um generally  speaking of the muslim culture through  the world there are some things that are  taboo  like uh showing your bare feet to  another man and they'll be blurred out  they'll blur out the feet of the  character they're like what what's why  would any  you know like you know you understand if  it's nudity or something why would you  blur out the feet so there you can tell  if you're watching the quote unquote the  muslim version of a japanese culture but  okay what if the kid you're talking  about grows up muslim in a muslim  majority  household society etc  in morocco  and he has this vision of a different  life in a different society  in japan  the first time i really thought about  this so i growing up i had black friends  there were a lot of black people in the  specific neighborhood in toronto i lived  in  that's not true of all of toronto and  it's not true of all of canada really  it's just that neighborhood we did have  a lot of black people  and you know  i saw  that there had been in the 1970s this  big interest among black people in  kung fu movies so these were mostly hong  kong kung fu movies a little bit of  interest in japanese culture among black  people but mostly hong kong chinese  culture for that generation 1970s  generation and then i saw that it did  kind of  died out like people  generally the black people  they'd love they'd cease to be  fascinated by east asian culture in this  way the kung fu craze kind of came and  went  and then  dragon ball z  was translated into english  and dragon ball z  specifically with urban black people  and urban  latino people hispanic people  and there was a separate spanish  translation of that  wow you could see their huge response to  the huge enthusiasm for this for this  cartoon and for them now this is  japanese culture  being commercialized okay so again i did  have a couple black friends growing up  and also i had just black acquaintances  and there were a lot of black people  around me okay  and i knew young black people high  school and university who had very  powerful escapist fantasies and it is  understandable  like  they  they wanted to escape  canadian society they wanted to escape  their own family in toronto they wanted  to escape canadian culture generally and  then the subculture within canada that  they were born into and didn't have a  choice about right  and  you know again like and sorry most of  these people sorry i knew  each black person was a different story  but yeah a lot of them the family is  very very christian this very  domineering you know christian household  you know  you know but regardless of the  particular religion  obviously some of them were raised in  muslim families too and so on and so  forth but you know  being born into this culture you  fundamentally don't like  japanese culture  presented an enticing alternative  a present presented something for a  fantasy life to latch onto  in a way that cuba  didn't  in a way that the soviet union didn't in  the in a way that mao zedong's china  didn't and they all tried  they all tried there was a huge movement  to try to convert american blacks to  communism and to convince them that the  workers paradise and socialism that have  they had perfect equality for the races  and you wouldn't be oppressed in russia  the way you were in the united states  you can read about it many books have  been made a couple documentary films too  i think uh  you know about black americans who  actually went to the soviet union and  lived there permanently some of them now  their grandchildren are alive you know  who are now whatever three-quarters  russian and one-quarter african-american  or whatever the story is the different  cases you know um  there were you know there were versions  of an earthly paradise presented to  african americans  and in case you've forgotten malcolm x  you know there was a whole generation  also of black radicals who were the  wishful thinking they were engaged in  was that there was a better society  quite literally in saudi arabia that  converting to islam and then going on  the hajj  going on a pilgrimage to mecca and  medina seeing the center of the muslim  world seeing the status of black people  in that society in contrast united  states america that that was supposed to  be the the escapist  fantasy right and this also of course  entails  language learning right  yeah look okay i'll be self-critical for  a second a second here  we've got some comments about learning  pali and so  um  okay  was there an escapist fantasy for me  in running away from canada to thailand  laos cambodia myanmar  sri lanka you know sorry  they might as well be one place from my  perspective because the life i was going  to lead involved  all of them want to move to this is was  there an escapist element no for me  personally  the answer is no i don't have to get  into a big monologue about my own  psychology and motivation but but i can  tell you this  the fantasy for me  was that i was going to have  colleagues  you know was that i was going to know  other intellectuals variously doing  research humanitarian work  etc that i was going to know people and  live my life with people and that they  were going to be sober hard-working  people because i grew up in a language  part of me i grew up in a cultural  context  dominated by  drunks and drug addicts  and so again you know  this is obviously for many  african-americans it's part of their  experience growing up i just heard an  interview with an african-american where  he was he was reflecting on his life and  talking about how much it  how much it really  damaged him  to grow up surrounded by drug addicts in  the way that he did  but doesn't mean you can be white you  can be any ethnicity and grow up and  recognize wow almost everyone around me  is some kind of drunk or drug addict so  just that just okay i can go to another  country  learn another language and i can be part  of a community this is literally a  religious community  that is defined by you know a commitment  to sobriety and a certain kind of  intellectual endeavor  you can call that an escapist fantasy  but at any rate it was a fantasy  i think it's not quite the same as what  we're talking about here  but yeah  i was gonna say a lot of us a lot of us  are born into a culture we fundamentally  want to escape from and then the  marketing of  polyglottery and of easy instance cheap  or free language education on the  internet fits into this fantasy life of  the 21st century  adult you know  really it's worth pointing out it's not  just young people yes  you know what you see on youtube is  predominantly young people you think  there aren't middle-aged people signing  up for this fantasy you think there  aren't people in retirement i think it  gets to people at every every age and  every stage of life and that's where a  lot of the money  will come from as older people who want  to turn over a new leaf and lead a feed  a better life lead a different life so  and so forth  um  anyway  this type of escapist fantasy has come  and gone  again and again whether it was pushed by  a religious ideology or a secular  political ideology like uh communism  you know  and i think that  this  scam within a scam this polyglot youtube  phenomenon it's kind of successfully put  together  several of the most intoxicating  elements of that kind of escapist  fantasy intentionally or unintentionally  like even if it's mirror happenstance  and it's ended up creating a subculture  that's qualitatively and quantitatively  different  from anything that's happened with  teach yourself architecture  teach yourself  uh  law  or even teach yourself math  right now let's be clear i've mentioned  this before but i once saw a book for  sale on amazon it was  just advertised to me i was not  searching for it about teaching yourself  advanced math  um  and you know the book description it  said hey you know you don't need to  enroll in university courses to build up  the skills you need to do advanced  algebra i think i think was both algebra  and calculus i forgot in this book so  you know this experienced professor and  math educator gives you a series of  explanations and exercises you can do  every day and within two years or  something  you can learn everything you should have  learned in high school and then go much  further and really understand advanced  mathematics  like imagine i just kind of sat there  thinking about it  you know because i in that case i  completely believe it like i completely  believe  that just for a person of average  intelligence  without that much work if you put in the  work every day you can build up  your ability in math nobody does  like that is not even one in a million  it is incredibly rare  as a hobby for someone to even do long  division let alone advanced trigonometry  or something you know nobody  does that there is no scene on youtube  monetizing the fantasy that you yes you  can teach yourself to be really good at  math and the irony is you can the irony  is that works like i totally like  there's no doubt in my mind you can do  that you can you can get good at math  right  and instead there's this really powerful  fantasy  uh connected to language education and  again  no matter how expensive you think this  is internet-based youtube-based language  education it is pennies like both in  terms of time in terms of money these  are really low costs compared to what  traditional language education was  whether inside the university or  otherwise  how do you calculate the cost  of going to live in a monastery in order  to learn a language how do you calculate  the cost of joining the army in our  language like this even if it's some  scenario in which you don't pay anything  the loss of years of your life and the  contractual obligations in exchange so  the the uniqueness  of the language learning fantasy  again that it's so unlike architecture  that it's someone like  math and so with everything else even if  so look one of the differences  if you get good at math who's going to  sleep with you  who's even going to flirt with you like  how is this going to improve your sex  life and again i'm interested in your  sex life  as an indirect indication of something  much more complex and political about  your social status your social standing  so like you know i used to i used to  lobby city hall all right if you go to  city hall is being good at math going to  open any doors for you like i'm saying i  don't even think knowing french will  here in canada like being really  bilingual influential  no one's gonna say oh wow and knowing  latin or no in greek it won't nail but  it did a couple hundred years ago right  if you went to city hall and you were a  hard-working assiduous person who could  really quote latin and greek  that was extremely esteemed that really  was significant for your status at  city hall right but as i say sexual  status  is an indirect and imperfect token of  this nobody believes they can get laid  by hitting the books and really getting  good at math right  okay  but what about architecture  all right even  architecture  right learning about architecture art  history  it seems like nothing else can be  commercialized in quite the same way  language education can be and that  language education has  so i'm going to take a moment and read  your comments guys if you want to type  something you want me to see it that's a  good time to and melissa if you want to  jump in and tell me i'm wrong about  everything  hit me  okay it's a question  do you think for people like ben from  franklin that this played a role in  their sex lives  yes  yes absolutely and ben franklin did  sleep around we know a fair bit about  his sex absolutely  absolutely  um  you know  at that time it was really a man's world  but  you know his status  in gentlemen's clubs  his status in different royal scientific  societies and so on had everything to do  with his being able to front on  uh knowing these languages sure and even  his being sent on that mission to france  um  you know sure  you know but but i mean both the  appearance of his area edition and the  reality of it sure had everything to do  with this yeah  go on you  yeah one of the things that he was ugly  no offense  but is it too soon is it too soon to  admit that ben franklin was both fat and  ugly okay can we no is it too soon  and he had kids out of wedlock on you  right yeah one other thing i wanted to  ask or at least  to talk about is  i remember  maybe a couple years ago  first thinking about this because you  brought it up to me and i was i felt  stupid thinking wow how did i not how  had i gotten to like  i don't know 27 without really thinking  about the origin of the term bachelors  right what does this mean like okay i  have a bachelor's in english right okay  well there are there's like obvious  right so what's the etymology and why  why is that the term we use rather than  something else right yeah so it relates  to this idea  you're just saying that he was never a  member of gentlemen's clubs right yes  yes  bachelor's clubs young men young  educated men yes right and he continued  to be as he became an old man too  yes yeah yeah yeah no but i mean you  know this is a he lived in a time before  or even telephones and so on but  very literally the places he was allowed  to sit the tables he was allowed to sit  at and so on sure and  again that was entirely self-taught that  was entirely through his own  he had no he didn't even have high  school he didn't even have primary  school it was just through through self  education yeah  so no and think about how different his  life would be if he just remained a  an illiterate worker someone who just  worked with his aunts so it changed  changed everything yeah now anyway it's  an extreme example and i am not out here  making such promises  but i i'm saying that that that was a  fantasy i think for innumerable uh young  men born in disadvantaged circumstances  that they too could be  in some way like benjamin franklin that  kind of upward mobility including  sexually that that could become possible  for them through hard work oh and by the  way he had his own best-selling books  full of those types of aphorisms  um so he published a calendar that was  not really a calendar in our sense i  think it's now referred to as benjamin  franklin's almanac  and he had these pithy  statements of worldly wisdom about being  scholarly and sober and hardworking and  saving your money and so on and yeah so  he you know  didn't take a lot of imagination to  figure out what the ben franklin formula  for success was so there's some there's  some questions here about specific  languages i don't mind answering them  just because they're brief but it's not  really the top of this video someone  asks if it wouldn't be easier to learn  sanskrit first and then work on pali so  to do sanskrit first and then pali  why don't you learn italian first and  then learn spanish  be depressing as hell  and the resources you have for sanskrit  are religious as hell  so  you know you will probably lose interest  and never get there um i have never met  one person who gained advanced stability  in pally by working on sanskrit first i  have met and i have seen evidence of a  lot of people who had phds who claimed  they had ability in pali who never got  over the hump that separates censor from  pali  but you know am i gonna is it impossible  no of course not you could learn italian  first and then learn spanish  but if you're really passionate about  learning spanish learn spanish  like it doesn't make sense  my point is here italian and spanish are  similar languages of course  but it doesn't make sense to study  italian first to help you with learning  spanish  if you want to learn italian and you  learn italian you know anyway sorry  that's a short answer but that for  someone watching this video that might  be important and obviously that can  apply to a lot of other languages well  look sir we have korean mention next  is it easier to learn japanese first and  then learn korean is it easier to learn  chinese first and then learn korean if  what you want to learn is korean  like it would just be madness to suggest  any other language um as a means to uh  learning korean so you know it's a it's  a generalized problem  but i mean you know if you it doesn't  make sense to me if you say yes if you  tell me that you're so passionate about  learning korean  that you learned vietnamese first  that's just what sense does that make  what you're gonna learn korean avaya  chinese japanese vietnamese it doesn't  make sense  and that does i mean i know people are  putting those positions institutionally  i've mentioned the story before i knew a  young woman and she had been forced to  learn vietnamese in order to learn  cambodia because that was more  profitable for her university they could  make more money that way  so you know but no it's  don't don't uh  don't reason your way into this don't  make excuses to the point where this  seems to make sense because it really  doesn't make sense  so we have someone in the in the  audience who's in vancouver shout out to  distant vancouver far away exotic  vancouver and he says he or she says um  he's teaching korean moms english as a  second language  seems to be korean people who are  already living in canada and he says  they want to advance too quickly they  can't even sit through an academic  english class they want to go to college  to immigrate  but can't put in to can't put in the  effort to memorize advanced vocabulary  i mean it's it's interesting because  people can nail  through the cellular phone through  computer technology generally they can  cope with living in a foreign country in  a foreign language without ever really  learning that language forever  right  in a way that they couldn't in the past  because you know what what do you really  need to be able to say you go to the  grocery store  and you say i'm looking for tahini and  you don't know the word for tahini in  the language but you can use your phone  you can live in a kind of constant  reliance on computer translation you can  get by and these korean moms they may  have been living in canada for years i  don't know he doesn't give back on how  long they've been here but you could  live in canada for 10 years 20 years 100  years and never really learn english  while  you know your cellular phone your laptop  computer etc while google translate uh  helps you get by so certainly you know i  just say  um  [Music]  you know many parts of the world  india is probably the best example the  importance of knowing english has  decreased  not increased  you might think oh that's paradoxical  are you really saying that 50 years ago  the english language was more important  in india than it is today yes that's  exactly what i'm saying you know it's  possible now to live your whole life  just speaking tamil in a way it wasn't  50 years ago there was a lot of pressure  within india like people who never  planned to leave india still needed to  learn english or learn a certain amount  of english to get ahead within india  and that's decreasing and disappearing  but certainly you know and look  i obviously i could live in japan now  without ever learning japanese i have  footnote i have actually studied  japanese university but obviously i  could get around japan just using my  cell phone and so on and so forth  so yeah um  you know computer technology  enables education  but to a much greater extent  computer technology enables ignorance  now um  i remember the difference you know i  remember when i was a child and it was  really respected for you to remember  precise historical dates  and precise figures  and how that kind of knowledge came to  be despised when it was instantly  available through google nobody needs to  know the exact year something happened  anymore from memory but before google  before the internet if you didn't know  the year something happened  what are you gonna do walk to a library  find the right paper book on the shelf  take down the paper book right there  there was really a value placed on not  just generalized memorization  but being able to summon up  very specific  information from your own memory now  actually another example that was the  role of a lawyer  one of the main things that was prized  about a lawyer was remembering  the specifics of laws and even the  section code and title like oh no under  14e it says this that was what was  really valued about a lawyer  so today that's disappeared also so  again  computer technology enables education  it also disables it  it enables people living without  education it undermines it undermines  the value of certain types of knowledge  certain types of expertise i've seen  that to a massive massive extent  you know  so another sorry this is a very simple  question but it's a great question from  henry gann shout out to henry  henry says quote  who learns languages  who reads book who reads books  i remember looking at statistics and  this is very much pre-internet this is  in my youth  for  how many non-fiction books per year  people actually read in different  cultures around the world so it was  basically a study like how many books  do people buy  then how much how many of those books  are fiction how much are non-fiction and  at that time the country that read the  most books in the world was south korea  they were the most actively literate  culture in the world i do not know if  that's true today at all  i do not know to what extent those  statistics exist today to what extent  that's really  knowable and i just mentioned  non-fiction  is also a bit misleading because  non-fiction includes technical manuals  it includes things you have to buy for  work that  it's not really what we think about  when we say reading non-fiction you know  the tax code is non-fiction you know um  so you know you'd need fairly detailed  statistics however obviously with the  the advent of purchasing books on the  internet in principle it should be  easier to know precisely what kind of  books people are buying  um but you can also just survey people  and try to get honest answers about how  much they're reading it is not  a minor or trivial thing to say that the  vast majority of people  read nothing  unless they are compelled to read it  whether that is compulsion by  a university classroom it's compulsion  by their employment their job requires  them to read something or compulsion by  a religious authority figure like when  you take the bible out of the equation  how much reading is anyone doing  per year and the answer is  practically zero  almost nobody is reading  anything  and you know look what are you doing  with the next five years of your life  what if you wanted to challenge that  what if you wanted to change that  in a way big or small  you know  i used this example 100 times i don't  think anyone reacts to it positively  look at what mothers against drunk  driving accomplished  you know  what if a small  organization could really change culture  could really change the law could really  change the world you know like it's not  that edgy it's not that provocative i  mean defund the police is pretty [ __ ]  edgy and provocative and you saw how  many millions of dollars were donated  well what if and you know and by the way  if you haven't seen my videos about it i  am a critic of the defund the policeman  i do not support the defund the police  movement but anyway it's still an  interesting and important example in our  times  um  you know obviously the giles jean in  france a very edgy a very provocative  movement who really wants to donate  money to support that movement when  they're smashing up  uh you know shops and restaurants and  and tearing up uh  the paving on the street and so on  pardon me i'm also i mean i'm a critic  of the geology zone but i also  sympathize that they are fundamentally a  pro-democracy movement so i have a mix  of criticism  and praise for moving like that  but  okay if what you really want is to  improve the quality of education  in our society if that's really what you  want to do  if you want to take a society of  semi-literates  you know and really improve the quality  and quantity of reading people are doing  the intellectual caliber of your society  look at the difference that uh mothers  against drunk driving made and ask  yourself in the next five years do you  think you could make a difference like  that i think you have a shot  and i think you have a shot whether  you're in madrid or you're in mongolia  like this is not i'm not stereotyping  americans here this is not an american  problem i've i've lived in england  okay like if you think the british are  more intellectual than americans you're  wrong i would say less so just being  real with you the intellectual caliber  of people and anyone's at a lower level  than the united states of america  so some of these questions are really  really short and simple but they are  actually kind of interesting to me  um  from clouds quote do you think language  learning is generally the most difficult  intellectual endeavor  so i'll answer first but mostly you  might have so said with this like a  really shallow answer is that seriously  what is harder than learning a second  language a third like really what's  harder okay this is what i have to say  about it um one  learning a second language is unnatural  and this is not an appeal to language  fallacy we have a certain very finite  evolved capacity  to learn language that begins while  breastfeeding as an infant to learn  language just by listening and observing  as a small child  we have no innate capacity to be  polyglots it is a very unnatural thing  to think  in just two languages let alone three  four five eight twelve languages right  you are really working against nature  now again not an appeal to nature  fallacy  um with physical fitness  uh if you uh  if you want to be lean and muscular  there's a certain point at which that is  natural you're working with nature like  if you just if you just jog  if you just eat a healthy diet and go  jogging you are going to look  muscular to some extent athletic to some  extent lean to some extent right if you  want to look like arnold schwarzenegger  if you want to look like a competitive  bodybuilder or into something unnatural  you're really not evolved to have  muscles hanging off your body that way  the way you know the most the most  successful bodybuilders in the world  were and for  i think for everyone it's unachievable  without the use of steroids like that at  that level of competition that level of  size and mass you know so it's unnatural  by more criteria than one but even if  even if you were born with some genetic  anomaly that allows you to gain that  much muscle just through exercise  without use of of drugs  you know  things can be natural up to a certain  point in the spectrum and then become  unnatural meaning up to a certain point  you're working with nature  and then beyond a certain point you're  working against it  so why is learning a language so  difficult  this is one part it is fundamentally  unnatural  waking up at 5 30 in the morning to hit  the books and study a language is  unnatural it's never going to be  natural it's never gonna feel good never  all right jogging can feel good swimming  can feel sports athleticism  can feel good you know  this is always  gonna cut against your nature okay the  other thing is this  um  if i'm having an in-depth conversation  about the history of buddhism  history politics philosophy  the amount of time i have to think about  my answer  just like just in a conversation it  might seem like i'm answering really  quickly  but if you measure the number of seconds  i actually have pretty long i listen to  the other person and i sit there  thinking and i you know  i get to put together a reply the  challenge with spoken language  any language including your own first  language that you may still be improving  your ability in for decades  i speak english better now than i did 10  years ago  and i'm a mean old man you know melissa  you were starting with that earlier  today just her ability and verbal  communication has improved and so on you  know  in her first language even you know okay  when i speak chinese  if i go back to speaking japanese lotion  tai cambodian  okay it's so fast  listening comprehension  and speaking ability and putting  together a sentence and speaking it it's  so  fast  it's it's fast compared to weightlifting  at the gym  i can do 30 push-ups and then sit there  and rest for a few seconds you know what  i mean and i can think about what  exercise i'm going to do next and you  know  it may seem ridiculous but to compare to  physical exercise but you can you can  space out and slow down physical  exercise right and with language there  is no space and no time either you can  answer instantly and either you can  listen and like have listening  comprehension instantly or not at all  right so these are these are two  different categories  within which i think yes language  learning is the most difficult  intellectual endeavor i'm going to give  you a third maybe i can keep going so i  don't know melissa feels some kind of  way about this  i was talking to a colleague a guy who's  also a youtuber and who also does  language education on youtube  specifically and he's a much much bigger  channel than mine as people say more  subscribers and more viewers than i do  and he was saying just kind of casually  like oh you know these days it's so easy  to make a friend on the internet and  have people help you study the language  people help you through you know skype  or other teleconferences oh you know you  just make friends they help you study  lunch  and i i said to him i wasn't being mean  but i was being very serious but like  what are you talking about  like you can study a language for 10  years  and never have one person really help  you like you can wander in the desert  for years trying to find one friend  one colleague one person who cares  enough about you to help you with the  language  and you know  that can be learning la ocean and laos  it can be learning chinese in china and  whether it's on the internet or in real  life like it is just not the case that  people will help you for free  and the work involved in language  learning it's it's very difficult and  you can ask yourself right now do you  want to help someone else learn english  for free  really  you know it's it's incredibly rare so  this is another category of of unique  and special difficulty that pertains to  language and i can only compare it to  theater alright if i really want to do  shakespeare i can come here on youtube  and start doing monologues from  shakespeare right but there are some  aspects of theater where i must have  other people i have to have a group of  people who can work together so a  special difficulty with language  learning is having encouragement  participation help  from other people now i'm just being  honest i don't know how much that's true  with math maybe it is true with math too  maybe you really need to work with other  people like maybe that helps a lot with  math i just you know i'm just saying  hypothetically like the the social  component the cooperative component and  even the competitive component  with language learning it's crucial  and i've learned languages totally alone  several studied several languages i  worked really really hard totally  totally alone it's horrible  so that is a special difficulty that  adds on to  to language learning as an intellectual  endeavor and there's no doubt all three  of these difficulties they fuel  the  enthusiasm the feeding frenzy for  language education and polio lottery  here on on youtube this is part of  what's going on people don't want to be  alone yeah  melissa on the microphone that's it  yeah i just wanted to say that  okay  when i was young  i remember the specific  kind of humiliation that i felt when i  said  the wrong word  and  the  mockery from my brothers  uh  and how that made me  forever remember  one word or another and that's part of  the process of learning language as a  child  and learning a second language you're  subjecting yourself to that same process  again as an adult  when you are more emotionally developed  so i think  in this sense i've been able to cope  with that better uh and also just the  people that i've worked with have been  nice enough not to you know  be cruel to me about it but in a sense  that is  the really difficult thing that  i don't feel as embarrassed about not  understanding  concepts in chemistry yeah but when it's  about language and when you know the  very fundamental thing about being human  is being to understand being able to  understand conversations around you and  um being able to understand this  have this understanding between two  people and when there is a disconnect  there uh it's it's really difficult in a  way that learning chemistry or learning  physics is not  yeah i i have difficulty with that  comparison because i just don't have  enough experience with chemistry and  physics like i'm just being honest i  don't feel i can agree or disagree with  you with that last part of it how it  compares to chemistry and physics  because i'll be honest with you i feel  like it would have been easy for me to  study chemistry or physics if i had a  brother who did it with me and like an  older brother i could frankly could have  been a younger brother if i had someone  else encouraging me and involved in that  and asking questions back and forth and  discussing it you know i feel like that  could be a huge part for me subjectively  of working on chemistry or physics as  opposed to just being completely alone  with the dry facts of the textbook you  know so  you want to say more on that maybe like  you know me  um  um you you may you may disagree with  somebody well i guess maybe i could ask  a question so is it about um  you know there i feel like there are two  elements here so one is the the  collaborative process the difficulty of  learning a language alone right and the  difficulty of learning comparing that to  the difficulty of writing physics alone  and then there's the element of  humiliation  right  yeah  i think  look i'm just opening the possibility  maybe that's something language learning  has in common with other forms of  learning including chemistry and physics  rather than  obviously i i still do think it is  important for language learning i'm just  not i just i'm challenging the  assumption that that's a unique  aspect of language yeah yeah that's  yeah so so anyway babe you know i i do  feel that uh fear  and humiliation are major parts of the  experience of education i've talked  about that recently and  people ignore the importance of that at  their peril  i think i mean look  if you imagine language students on a  spectrum  some  are kind of egoically invulnerable they  don't get embarrassed  they don't feel fear and trepidation  they don't feel humiliated by getting  something wrong or whatever  and that mets people like that  you meet people who are the proverbial  goofball  you meet the guy who's just totally  self-confident and suave even when he  mixed up the word sit and [ __ ]  you know  you know like he moves a chair and says  can i [ __ ] here and everyone laughs at  him and he's still completely like you  can really have language learning errors  that ridiculous you know  um in every language that kind of  there's something like that in every  language two words you can get you can  get mixed up you know  um you know so you can have the person  who's totally self-confident and and  reckless over to someone who's who's  very conservative and very fearful and  very careful in everything they say and  certainly if you talk to people who've  taught english as a second language in  japan they talk about that a lot with  their students because well it's so hard  for me to get my students to try things  and speak and answer questions because  they you know  uh with with japanese the way they will  express themselves is that they're  trying to be polite obviously that's  really an untranslatable cultural idiom  what what politeness means in japanese  is totally different from what it means  in english  culturally not just in terms of  vocabulary  but you know um  across that whole spectrum there are  people for whom language education  doesn't work  there are people who put 10 years into  it and they still just suck at the  language they still are just terrible at  it you know  so it's not the case a million youtube  channels will tell you oh just be a  goofball just be self-confident just be  outgoing just go and talk to people like  me as if that's the secret to language  learning and it's not  you know and there probably are some  youtube channels maybe you know  alexander  as an example who say beast very  studious work at your desk  be this scholarly reserved character and  that that's the way to develop ability  and language but i i just say across the  whole spectrum you meet people who  who failed at learning their target  language  but yeah um  [Music]  fear  and humiliation is a huge part of the  subjective experience  of of education and learning  and  fear of being wrong  and yeah i mean i i really do think it's  you know  i think it's certainly something nobody  on polyglot youtube wants to talk about  nobody commercializing this kind of  education and profit from it wants to  talk about and  maybe  you know sitting alone at your desk with  a dictionary  watching japanese anime may be part of  the problem is that you aren't  experiencing that fear and risk and  humiliation and pressure maybe the lack  of that is part of what's wrong with  this particular form of uh  you know commercialized  polyglottery commercialized language  education  so i i've already answered this question  in part brunner asks in the audience  what would you say is the main  difference between the study of language  and learning skills like math or  architecture that makes one of them  learnable on the internet and not the  other  so i've already given about five  different answers for this i think i  think you probably asked this question  before i gave many events but  let's relate this to what melissa just  raised  you know  do you have anyone in your life who will  tell you that you're wrong  when you're wrong  you know in in speaking a language you  know language does involve making  mistakes  and correction  you know  i mean  part of language  is like stand-up comedy you only know  when it's funny because you actually  took the risk and got it on stage and  presented it to an audience now i am not  sorry i've said it as i say maybe five  different criteria whereby language  acquisition is really special it is  really different from these other things  so i'm not  if you haven't seen that part of the  video go back and watch it i think those  criteria are more important  um  but math  you know  if the equation you did was right or  wrong  like math you can literally just turn to  the answers at the back of the book and  you know language is not like  um and  even with the language as easy to learn  as spanish italian french people live  making the same errors again and again  and again for  decades for their their whole lives you  know  certainly i've seen that even in english  if you have people wrong in in their  first language or if they speak english  a second language and they never improve  and they never get better  now  yeah that this is one of the differences  from math and architecture  you know i mean there are more  so look why is it such a powerful  fantasy  the escapism involved  in learning a new language i think it is  because people have the apprehension or  the intuition  that learning a new language changes who  you really are not just how people  perceive you which it does it does  change that you're perceived as a  different person even if you just speak  spanish  let alone chinese japanese more  challenging language changes the way  people  perceive you okay it changes the way you  think  it changes the way you feel it changes  the way you talk about your life  obviously it changes the way you live  um in a in a very intimate  moment-to-moment way it changes who you  are  now  whether you think that is shallow or  profound it's a tremendous change now  any one of you in the audience wherever  you're living i think i can say this  safely  there probably is a minority of people  where you're living you speak spanish  you know sorry like even if you're in  london england watching this you're in  glasgow scotland there's a spanish  minority uh you know a spanish-speaking  minority within london england okay but  obviously a lot of you are watching this  united states canada  what if  for two years  you took up a challenge this could be a  great youtube channel  only speaking spanish when you wrote say  your own home that you wouldn't say a  word of english you'd only speak in  spanish one thing is gonna change is who  you talk to right you're gonna start  living in a totally different community  even  if i only spoke french my life would be  totally different here right  but i think you can begin to imagine so  look you can watch the news in spanish  you can read the newspaper in spanish  like you can do everything in spanish  anywhere in the world now basically and  again  frankly even if you live in beijing  china even if you live in taipei  there's a spanish minority there really  is  i've seen it in taiwan there is a  spanish speaking minority there a lot of  them are from the caribbean islands but  they whatever they speak spanish  wherever they're from maybe they're not  from european continental spain  um  [Music]  okay whether you can imagine or not some  of you will already know exactly what  i'm talking about  you will think differently you will feel  differently you will dream differently  living in spanish for two years right so  it's a big change  um  and you know i'm willing to say it's  shallow rather than profound  but  there's nothing else  like it  you know  someone makes a joke  in the ocean  and you laugh and find it funny you know  when you laugh in that split second you  don't think about it for five minutes  and figure out well it's funny later you  make a joke like you know so me when i  first make make a joke in lotion people  laugh and find it funny because so maybe  this is shallow  it's a it's a big change when you find  yourself  struggling to remember the word for  something in english  you know english is your first language  but that's not the language you can't  remember  it's it's a big change architecture is  not like that math is stuff like that  okay and  you know i think a lot of people feel  like learning a new language in some  ways replaces their personality the  different people respond to this  challenge in different ways i think so  look  this is provocative  i think overcoming your accent is not  difficult  i think if you grew up speaking russian  i think you continue to speak english  with a russian accent because you're  retaining your russian identity because  you're holding on to this sense of your  personality and who you truly truly are  that's rooted in russian because you've  made a decision  that you're going to keep dreaming in  russian thinking in russian feeling in  russian even if you speak english  five days a week like you for you were  living in the united states of america  for 20 years and you still speak english  with the russian accent one of the most  dramatic of this is french that  phonetically there is no reason for  french people to say this is as this is  this is  the way frank the vast majority of  french people mispronounce english  constantly their whole lives  it's not difficult to overcome with  really very slight effort  they could learn to speak english  without a french accent with a neutral  like what have you you know  that's easy  all right but you choose not to do it  because you don't want to lose your  sense of identity  i don't mean i don't mean nationalism i  don't mean a political identity i mean  personal identity there's a sense of who  you really are  that's attached to that language that  you don't want to let go of and you know  sorry there are people born and raised  in canada but they still have a spanish  accent like they went through all levels  of schooling only in english never in  spanish but they still have a spanish  accent and korean and chinese and and  they never they never get over it you  know  so  yeah architecture is not like that you  know um the study of math is not like  that if if there's anything else like  that i don't know what it is  and yes  language is powerfully linked to your  sex life language is powerfully linked  to  religion  you know language is very often  powerfully linked to  social status career  who you think you are who you want other  people to perceive you as  you know  look guys i mean it doesn't mean a whole  lot to me but when i was at the pinnacle  of my ability to speak lotion it was  very moving and very strange  for me to witness lotion people saying  that i was one of them that they said  that i was loud  they weren't flattering me they weren't  saying it to me it would be like i'd be  in a room with five lotion people and  one of them would say to another oh no  it's okay he's one of us oh no he's  lotion like he's he's  i've only worked in the language for a  couple of years at that moment i could  really speak quite well like just my you  know within a limited vocabulary i could  i could really pronounce and use the  language well and it certainly it  created the illusion that i was much  more fluent than i was that i had much  more advanced fluency than i did  um  you know  in some ways that was very touching i  wasn't there for that i didn't want them  to embrace me as their brother or  something or accept me into their  culture or their nationality  um it reflects a lot about who the  lotions are lotions will accept you in a  way the japanese never will  you know there are different elements to  that um  but yeah  beyond the question of how people  perceive you and treat you  uh the  the way in which you think and feel from  moment to moment changes with the study  of language and even if that's easy  the difference between french and  english is easy the difference between  spanish and english is easy and the  difference between speaking english with  a french accent and speaking english  without a french accent it's really easy  it's not like learning chinese right  it's not like  you know  even when it's easy even when you're  looking at a language transition that's  easy in this emotional and psychological  way it's still hard  and as i say this probably is linked to  the escapist fantasy  um  talk about a nerdy  white american guy  who has no charisma in america he has no  charm in america but he feels that by  speaking japanese he can become charming  you know he can be charming in the  japanese language and you know what's  really [ __ ] up  maybe he's right  like maybe when he tells jokes in  japanese everyone laughs and when he  told jokes in english nobody thought he  was funny maybe he's wrong maybe you get  to japan you're speaking japanese and  you're still a dork and nobody likes  your jokes and you know  but  for enough people that there is a kind  of transformation again not just in your  status not just in how people perceive  you but in how you think and in some  sense and who you really are  and look sorry again  real okay so guys this is a real choice  i have to face  what if i stop everything i'm doing  i learn hebrew and i start living in  israel right legally i have the right to  do this because of my bloodline  right  everything would change for me okay what  if i stop everything i'm doing  and we go to a i don't know some  spanish-speaking country in latin  america that'll have me  el el salvador do you think i can get a  visa  i think el salvador might be desperate  enough for foreign investment at the  moment that i could i move permanently  to el salvador and spanish becomes now  look my point is not that i would ever  be perceived as an israeli living in  israel i would never be perceived as  salvadorian living in el salvador i'd be  perceived as an outsider but i would be  speaking that language every day and i  would be i would have a totally  different life politically emotionally  personally and in so many other ways the  thing is for me that's not an escapist  fantasy like for me there's really  nothing positive about that but for a  lot of people it's intoxicating um the  possibility of that and the reality of  it is intoxicating for them also you  know i  mean  is it putting a mask on or is it taking  a mask off  right  uh if you go and start a new life in  japan if you go start new life in el  salvador  and for a lot of guys it's taking the  mask off  i've met men who went to brazil who went  to colombia again the language isn't  learning portuguese learning spanish  it's not that and these guys they were  not reading in portuguese or spanish it  was just spoken communication they  weren't reading literature or politics  or history but you know they felt like  they were set free and that this is who  they really were  i'm alluding to quite a lot of darkness  there that i'm not actually going to  describe  yeah so very another very astute comment  from henry gann quote is it not is it  not ironic that the technology that was  supposed to bring us together is  actually contributing to our  vulcanization  um  okay from my very first contact with the  internet  that was what i perceived  i perceived the primary significance of  the internet being vulcanization in its  political sense  so  look my both of my parents were  communists  they were not moderate communists they  were extremists  other communists regarded them as  extremists they were more crazy more  extreme than the majority of communists  at that time  [Music]  my parents  they had no choice before the internet  they had no choice other than joining a  mainstream communist organization well  you know within canada there were  we still see we still see posters on the  street today for the for the communist  party they're still recruiting okay well  your choice is either you join that  party and you put up with their version  of communism or you're alone you're an  outsider you're shut out you shut the  door on them  and uh churches even small cults you  know either you join this church or you  have no church maybe there are four  different churches in your neighborhood  maybe there are 15 but this that's it  you have a certain number of choices  what i saw on the internet was  whoa  now  you can join thousands of different  communist groups now you can join  many many thousands of different  churches  now  every conceivable ideology is being  catered to as a niche market and many  ideologies that are as yet inconceivable  will be  catered to and yeah i saw i saw really  extreme and eccentric forms of  buddhism communism fascism what have you  that all of them were able to gather  their their community of followers and  indeed start making money wasn't wasn't  always about money but whether it was  about money or so yes i've got to i  agree  but from my perspective right from the  start that was what you saw and you also  saw the way in which that balkanization  reinforced people's sense of  self-confidence and dignity  in doing things that otherwise would  have been shameful  various illicit forms of sex  well now that you have an online  discussion forum  where you get to meet and talk to other  people who regard your particular sexual  predilections as normal like it's normal  within that one  facebook group or that one reddit group  whatever it is right now that you have  an internet forum of some kind where  your form of drug use  is reinforced as normal right and so on  for  religions political tendencies so on and  so forth so yeah  you know  i was kind of horrified around 1997 when  i first started thinking seriously about  the internet and what the effect was in  the world it would have  but  you know i'll give you a real specific  example  how to take the discarded brake pads  from a truck  and turn them into a wind power  generator  you could learn that instantly on the  internet before how would you even find  out that was possible let alone get a  step-by-step guide with diagrams how to  take discarded brake pads from a truck  and fit them onto this thing and make a  generator  well you know i that  you know i was involved in ecology i was  interested in wind power generation i  saw stuff like that and i got it i was  like wow okay so this is how it's going  to change the world by really  you know deepening the divisions  between these different cult-like groups  but also deepening the groups themselves  deepening their access to information so  and so even if it's just completely  pragmatic information like that  henry gann comments quote my own abject  failure learning a second language even  spanish tells me that it is easier to  learn organic chemistry  you know we can we can order teach  yourself organic chemistry from amazon  right  we could do a whole series of youtube  videos thumbs up if you'd support that  idea if we do a whole series of youtube  videos organic chemistry for dummies we  can do an organic chemistry  we have to check is that title already  taken is there already a book called  organic we can just start doing organic  chemistry  the equivalent of polyglot videos on  youtube study with me videos we're going  to do a whole thing for organic  chemistry about how you can go from zero  to hero in organic chemistry and you can  do it with us  i think there's gonna be any money in  that i think do you think i'm gonna get  laid doing that i think i'm gonna be  able to cheat on my girlfriend through  teaching organizations  maybe so maybe i'm wrong maybe you'd  really maybe you'd really get a  following of people who want the  encouragement and really value you  talking about your own struggle to  master organic organic chemistry  but yeah um i think that's an example  where there's no real barrier to entry  whereas with language learning we really  do rely on these institutions that  haven't changed that much in 200 years  um  and we don't yet have a substitute for  it but the popularity of these forms of  the internet is very much based on  catering to the fantasy that those  institutions have become obsolete  whereas they have not  great question from clouds so melissa i  don't think you've ever heard this  clouds asks quote i remember you said  you had considered mongolia instead of  cambodia  was the language a major factor in your  decision to go to cambodia and southeast  asia instead of ongoing so i don't know  if i've ever talked about this um  mongolian was quite accessible to me  where i was at the university of toronto  i mean i could get all the books i  needed and audio recordings and so on  and i was i was really able to do quite  a bit of study  you know there's studying a language and  then there's learning about the language  you know  so it wasn't wasn't that i was directly  studying mongolian as a language but i  was learning about the language and the  theory and history and for example what  the relationship was between mongolian  and the languages of india and languages  of china and where the vocabulary came  from and you know linguistics rather but  i was able to do quite a lot of reading  about mongolian  and start learning also the history of  buddhism in the country this kind of  thing  and you know  there was one professor teaching  mongolian at university of toronto at  that time  and i think because of that professor  because of the kind of vestiges of the  idea that there'd be a department for  mongolian studies at university of  toronto  um  [Music]  there was a photo exhibition  there was an exhibition of artistic  photography  from mongolia  and i stood there looking at these  pictures  of the barren lifeless desert  and feeling like i was staring into the  jaws of death  i like desert i quite specifically like  the desert of nevada new mexico the  united states desert is actually kind of  appealing and beautiful to me as a  climate i've been there a couple times  i've seen that you know but i remember  those photographs and looking at those  photographs and thinking  this  this is where you're choosing to go  for the rest of your life you know and  in case you haven't guessed these  photographs were not trying to make  mongolia look horrifying they're trying  to make it look beautiful  you know  i remember looking at that  and  you know had to admit to myself  um  i don't eat meat  i don't drink alcohol  these people their culture totally  revolves around  eating meat and drinking alcohol  you know this is their freezing cold  climate this is you know  but that was the turning point was  seeing the the photographs of that  exhibition  you know  and it's it's very interesting that it  had that effect on me  because i actually do love the desert i  quite like desert  but  i remember there were photographs  of wells that had gone dry i don't think  i'm misremembering that you know when  there's a well maybe a thousand years  ago or 500 years ago it produced water  but now it's just a hole sinking into  the desert and there's nothing there but  dust you know  and um  yeah i mean i felt a certain kind of  fear  you know  and  i think i made the right choice  see in the years since i've met many  many people who became mongolian  specialists mongolian experts  and  this one guy  i didn't know him well but i i knew him  well enough  he had been  a sober vegetarian  before he went to mongolia to do his phd  research  when he came back  he was a pot-bellied  meat-eating alcoholic  he had ceased to be vegetarian and  ceased to be sober and you know  for what  for all the dust in mongolia  [Laughter]  yeah javier says that uh in his culture  people will mock and humiliate you if  you use the right accent  and other people start to feel insecure  uh so this is a huge issue it's just not  the topic today but you know social  linguistics  and a huge issue within chinese too  how comfortable are people with you  speaking different languages and  different dialects and different accents  and you know this is one of the huge  differences between england and the  united states of america americans are  much more accepting of you  your kind of accent neutral basis and  you know in england how much money you  have is totally tied to your accent you  know it's horrible the the class  stratification of accent in england and  things yeah  but no no it's a huge issue the the  mockery and so on but  obviously i mean  part of the fantasy of going to japan is  that because you you look like a  foreigner they'll be so accepting of you  and you by the way there's some truth to  this if you meet people who are  ethnically japanese but who grew up  speaking only english and then learned  japanese a second language the way they  are treated in japan is much worse than  being a white person or a black person  who is japanese and if you talk to  people who are ethnically korean but who  grew up only speaking english then learn  korean as a second language they're  treated really badly in korea  you know whereas a white person or a  black person you learn korean it's very  different so yeah yeah some some of  those issues of judgment on on accidents  and so on  okay so so larry has a series of  comments and he says quote maybe that's  why the very act of language learning  got promoted to such a status as it  could be seen as a side effect of the  monotone i think he means monotonous but  monotone fair enough monotone in a  poetic sense a very monotone and  habitual consumption of foreign language  media this means watching uh anime from  japan and this kind of thing  well larry  i disagree with you in a strange sense i  think that everyone who learns a  language  wants to change their life  the only exception i can think of is  someone who is already married to  someone like you get married to a  filipino woman and then you can't  communicate you try to learn tagalog to  communicate with your wife and those  people are very rarely motivated enough  to learn a foreign language you know  where you're like where you're trying to  learn a language just to keep things the  same you're trying to learn a language  that your wife won't divorce you or you  won't can stop fighting with each other  that that's very rare but i just say um  actually learning a language japanese  chinese or any of these it will always  proceed from a conviction of  something has to change  nothing is going to change unless i get  off my ass and change it  i'm going to learn japanese or i'm going  to learn chinese or i'm going to learn  italian or whatever it is and following  through with that doing all the hard  work for hundreds of hours  over many years  um  there's some kind of change people are  aiming at and frankly i think that's why  this is all worth talking about you know  um i think a lot of people want change  some people want political change some  people want personal change you know a  lot of people want to change the culture  they're living in or the political  system they're living in if you were  born and raised in indonesia it's much  easier to fantasize about learning  japanese and running away to japan than  it is to fantasize about how to create  democracy and  atheism in indonesia isn't it easier to  run away to a country that's already  predominantly democratic and  predominantly atheist  look even russia i mean even running  away from morocco  to learn russian and go live in russia i  mean i know russia it's divided between  atheists and christians but still wow  compared to life in morocco compared to  life in indonesia moving to moscow right  now would seem like paradise hey you get  to be surrounded by atheists  you know secular modern people with with  modern attitudes so you know again it  doesn't have to be learning japanese  it's just the main example i'm using  here um  people want  change and learning a language is very  hard but compared to changing the  political system in the country you live  in and compared to changing your own  life  in the country you live in learning a  new language will seem easy it's easier  than the other ways to get to  uh that kind of change and thus it's the  basis for such powerful escapist  fantasies  you